http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/11/us/lem-johns-who-guarded-vice-president-lyndon-b-johnson-in-dallas-dies-at-88.html?rref=homepage&module=Ribbon&version=origin&region=Header&action=click&contentCollection=Home%20Page&pgtype=article
Lem Johns, a Secret Service agent who guarded Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson when President John F. Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas and who became a high-ranking Secret Service official during Johnson’s administration, died on Saturday at his home in Hoover, Ala. He was 88.

His grandson Michael Johns announced the death. Mr. Johns was the first of three generations in his family to serve as presidential Secret Service agents.

Mr. Johns was among three Secret Service agents riding directly behind the convertible carrying Mr. Johnson and his wife, Lady Bird, as the Kennedy motorcade wound through downtown Dallas on Nov. 22, 1963.

“I heard two ‘shots,’ not knowing whether they were firecrackers, backfire, or gunshots,” he wrote in a report to the chief of the Secret Service a week after the assassination. “I jumped from the security car and started running for the vice president’s car.”

But he did not make it. “A third shot had sounded and the entire motorcade then picked up speed and I was left on the street,” he said.

Photo

Lem Johns, a Secret Service agent, can be seen over the head of Jacqueline Kennedy as she stood beside Lyndon B. Johnson, who was being sworn in on Nov. 22, 1963. Credit Cecil Stoughton/White House
Rufus Youngblood, the chief agent in Johnson’s security detail, covered the Johnsons with his body as their car followed Kennedy’s limousine and a Secret Service auto behind the limo in a dash to Parkland Hospital. Clint Hill, an agent riding on the outside of the presidential backup car, climbed onto the presidential limousine to push a scrambling Mrs. Kennedy back into her seat.

Mr. Johns, stranded momentarily when the motorcade sped off, climbed aboard a car carrying photographers, then transferred to the sidecar of a police motorcycle that took him to Parkland. He found Johnson, who was unhurt, secured by the Secret Service in a treatment room and joined in guarding him while surgeons worked in vain to save Kennedy’s life. They also treated Gov. John B. Connally of Texas, who had been riding with the Kennedys and was wounded.

While Mr. Johns was seeking a secure hospital exit for Johnson’s return to Love Field Airport in Dallas and a flight back to Washington, an unmarked police cruiser, leaving from a different spot outside the hospital, departed for the airport with the vice president and Mr. Youngblood, leaving Mr. Johns behind in the chaos of the moment.

Another police car took him to Love Field, and he was put in charge of making sure that all those aboard Air Force One had a legitimate reason to be there. There were fears at the time that an attempt on Johnson’s life might be next as he awaited the arrival of Mrs. Kennedy and her husband’s body before taking off.

 Mr. Johns received an award from the Treasury Department, which oversaw the Secret Service at the time, for his actions in responding to the sound of gunfire.

When Cecil Stoughton, the White House photographer, snapped what became a signature image of the assassination, Johnson taking the presidential oath aboard Air Force One, flanked by his w ife and Mrs. Kennedy, Mr. Johns was standing behind Mrs. Kennedy. The upper portion of his face is visible in the photograph.

Mr. Youngblood became head of Johnson’s White House security detail, and Mr. Johns transferred to it as well. He was named the detail’s chief in November 1965, and became an assistant director of the Secret Service in overall charge of protective forces in December 1967.

Mr. Johns and Mr. Youngblood joined in protecting Johnson when demonstrators protesting the Vietnam War hurled bags of paint that burst against his limousine on Johnson’s October 1966 visit to Melbourne, Australia. Mr. Johns was drenched with red paint and Mr. Youngblood with green paint, but no one was hurt.

Mr. Johns left Washington early in the presidency of Richard M. Nixon. He returned to be administrative chief and security director for Joseph A. Califano Jr., secretary of Health, Education and Welfare under President Jimmy Carter.

Thomas Lemuel Johns was born in Birmingham, Ala., on Dec. 11, 1925. He served in naval aviation during World War II, worked as a Birmingham firefighter, graduated from Howard College (now Samford University) in suburban Birmingham, and then served as a criminal investigator for the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and Explosives.

He joined the Secret Service in 1954, and was a member of Dwight D. Eisenhower’s protective detail during the last two years of his presidency.

Mr. Johns is survived by his wife, Nita; his son, Jeff; three grandchildren; and five great-grandchildren. His son, Jeff, was on President Ronald Reagan’s Secret Service detail, and his grandson Michael was on the detail for President George W. Bush and for President Obama until 2010.

When Mrs. Johnson died in Texas in July 2007, Mr. Johns represented President George W. Bush in paying respects as she lay in repose.

On the 50th anniversary of the Kennedy assassination, he recounted the moment when he had arrived at Parkland Hospital.

“When I walked in, I walked right past the presidential limousine, saw the blood on the back seat, flowers everywhere,” he told WBRC-TV in Birmingham, Ala. “I know I can’t block it out.”